#LyX 2.3 created this file. For more info see http://www.lyx.org/
\lyxformat 544
\begin_document
\begin_header
\save_transient_properties true
\origin unavailable
\textclass article
\use_default_options true
\maintain_unincluded_children false
\language english
\language_package default
\inputencoding auto
\fontencoding global
\font_roman "default" "default"
\font_sans "default" "default"
\font_typewriter "default" "default"
\font_math "auto" "auto"
\font_default_family default
\use_non_tex_fonts false
\font_sc false
\font_osf false
\font_sf_scale 100 100
\font_tt_scale 100 100
\use_microtype false
\use_dash_ligatures true
\graphics default
\default_output_format default
\output_sync 0
\bibtex_command default
\index_command default
\paperfontsize default
\use_hyperref false
\papersize default
\use_geometry false
\use_package amsmath 1
\use_package amssymb 1
\use_package cancel 1
\use_package esint 1
\use_package mathdots 1
\use_package mathtools 1
\use_package mhchem 1
\use_package stackrel 1
\use_package stmaryrd 1
\use_package undertilde 1
\cite_engine basic
\cite_engine_type default
\use_bibtopic false
\use_indices false
\paperorientation portrait
\suppress_date false
\justification true
\use_refstyle 1
\use_minted 0
\index Index
\shortcut idx
\color #008000
\end_index
\secnumdepth 3
\tocdepth 3
\paragraph_separation indent
\paragraph_indentation default
\is_math_indent 0
\math_numbering_side default
\quotes_style english
\dynamic_quotes 0
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 1
\paperpagestyle default
\tracking_changes false
\output_changes false
\html_math_output 0
\html_css_as_file 0
\html_be_strict false
\end_header

\begin_body

\begin_layout Title
Consequence of Taxes: The Whiskey Rebellion
\end_layout

\begin_layout Author
Devin Moore
\end_layout

\begin_layout Labeling
\labelwidthstring 00.00.0000

\series bold
Instructor: 
\series default
Professor Joseph Navelski
\end_layout

\begin_layout Labeling
\labelwidthstring 00.00.0000

\series bold
Assignment: 
\series default
Writing Assignment 2
\end_layout

\begin_layout Labeling
\labelwidthstring 00.00.0000

\series bold
Class:
\series default
 EconS101 Section 2
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\paragraph_spacing double
The revolutionary war resulted in a hugely positive outcome for America,
 but it didn’t come without its costs.
 In this case we’re concerned the most with the financial debt that the
 federal government, and the states had incurred fighting for independence.
 Approximately 54 million dollars was owed by the government, and 25 million
 by the states.(The Whiskey Rebellion, HistoricalSpotlight).
 In an effort to increase America's ability to borrow money they sought
 to eliminate this old debt.
 The United States Secretary of Finance at the time was Alexander Hamilton,
 and his idea was to consolidate both debts in order for the federal government
 to pay it down through the issuance of new bonds.
 To pay for the interest from this newly incurred debt he urged congress
 to enact tariffs, and more importantly an excise tax on whiskey.
 I do not believe that the tax was justified if we are concerned at all
 with the benefits principle.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\paragraph_spacing double
The general idea behind the benefits principle is that if you’re in some
 way receiving a benefit from a government program the burden of paying
 the tax that supports that program should fall on you.
 So ideally the people that would benefit from this the most would be the
 farmers themselves If we examine the motivations behind the tax it shows
 us that the government and people with wealth benefited by far the most.
 The government had recently taken on a new debt to pay off old debt and
 this new debt needed to have it’s interest paid for so that they could
 continue to spend while having a large deficit.
 Before the plan to release new bonds for purchase speculators and some
 people in the government went around buying up the bonds of people that
 weren’t in the know, and therefore they stood to make a massive profit.
 To me this shows that the principles of the benefits of tax were not adhered
 to when the tax was being drawn up, and the real motivation of the tax
 was to uphold Hamilton's economic vision of the united states.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\paragraph_spacing double
Hamilton also was not concerned with the ability to pay the tax when he
 was drawing it up.
 The burden of paying the tax fell disproportionately on smaller distilleries
 versus larger ones as a function of how much volume they are able to produce
 and sell.
 Smaller distilleries could not sell enough whiskey to pay the flat fee
 (which cost on average 6 cents a gallon), and were forced to pay the per
 gallon amount of 9 cents.
 This means that this tax had neither horizontal, nor vertical equity.
 Distilleries that produced the same good, but at different volumes were
 being treated differently (horizontal equity).
 Larger distilleries had much greater ability to pay therefore should bear
 the greatest burden of the tax (vertical equity), but in reality this gave
 them the ability to sidestep a good portion of the tax.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\paragraph_spacing double
Frontier farmers were extremely unhappy with this tax as the incidence of
 the tax fell on them, and they protested by simply not paying it.
 Who pays the largest share of a tax, also known as the incidence of the
 tax, depends on who has the ability to avoid the tax by changing what market
 you're selling to or buying from.
 Small distilleries were usually found out on the frontier because the farmers
 out there had a much more difficult time transporting their crops to the
 markets on the east coast.
 This meant that their supply was inelastic as they had few, if any, substitute
 markets to sell their wheat so they turned to distilling whiskey.
 On the other hand buyers had plenty of options as there were many more
 firms distilling spirits which provided many substitute goods and therefore
 demand was elastic.
 This meant that the burden of the tax fell mostly on the sellers, and because
 the tax itself burdened smaller distilleries more they justifiably protested
 the tax which led to government intervention.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\paragraph_spacing double
Clearly Hamilton was not concerned with the actual consequences of the tax
 on the frontier farmers, and instead focused on what he saw as the best
 outcome for the country.
 This means that the benefits principle can not be used to justify enacting
 the whiskey tax.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Bibliography
\begin_inset CommandInset bibitem
LatexCommand bibitem
label "The Whiskey Rebellion - HistoricalSpotlight"
key "key-1"
literal "false"

\end_inset

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hX9gKS7uMZY
\end_layout

\end_body
\end_document
