#LyX 2.3 created this file. For more info see http://www.lyx.org/
\lyxformat 544
\begin_document
\begin_header
\save_transient_properties true
\origin unavailable
\textclass article
\use_default_options true
\maintain_unincluded_children false
\language english
\language_package default
\inputencoding auto
\fontencoding global
\font_roman "default" "default"
\font_sans "default" "default"
\font_typewriter "default" "default"
\font_math "auto" "auto"
\font_default_family default
\use_non_tex_fonts false
\font_sc false
\font_osf false
\font_sf_scale 100 100
\font_tt_scale 100 100
\use_microtype false
\use_dash_ligatures true
\graphics default
\default_output_format default
\output_sync 0
\bibtex_command default
\index_command default
\paperfontsize default
\use_hyperref false
\papersize default
\use_geometry false
\use_package amsmath 1
\use_package amssymb 1
\use_package cancel 1
\use_package esint 1
\use_package mathdots 1
\use_package mathtools 1
\use_package mhchem 1
\use_package stackrel 1
\use_package stmaryrd 1
\use_package undertilde 1
\cite_engine basic
\cite_engine_type default
\use_bibtopic false
\use_indices false
\paperorientation portrait
\suppress_date false
\justification true
\use_refstyle 1
\use_minted 0
\index Index
\shortcut idx
\color #008000
\end_index
\secnumdepth 3
\tocdepth 3
\paragraph_separation indent
\paragraph_indentation default
\is_math_indent 0
\math_numbering_side default
\quotes_style english
\dynamic_quotes 0
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 1
\paperpagestyle default
\tracking_changes false
\output_changes false
\html_math_output 0
\html_css_as_file 0
\html_be_strict false
\end_header

\begin_body

\begin_layout Title
\paragraph_spacing double
Assignment 1: Immigration
\end_layout

\begin_layout Author
\paragraph_spacing double
Devin Moore 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Date
\paragraph_spacing double
Professor Navelski: EconS101 Section 2 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\paragraph_spacing double
The Mariel Boat-Lift was a large immigration of Cubans into Miami in 1980,
 and represented the perfect opportunity for economists to understand how
 immigration affects the local economy.
 Two articles released in 2017 sought to understand this effect by studying
 the wages of low-skill workers using census data.
 One, by Giovanni Peri and Vasil Yasenov, found that there was no noticeable
 change in the overall trend of wages after the boatlift.
 The other, by George Borjas, concluded that the boatlift caused a clear
 reduction in the income of low skill workers.
 These studies arrived at different conclusions due to the differences in
 the specific subset of census data each chose to examine.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\paragraph_spacing double
The census data was filtered in an attempt to remove any bias, but the specific
 groups Borjas excluded introduced some into his study.
 Both studies focused on people between the ages of 24 and 60 as well as
 removing any workers that had education above a high school degree.
 Borjas’ study additionally removed women, non-Cuban Hispanics, and anybody
 with a high school degree or above.
 This represented a vast majority of the people in the original data set,
 and such a small sample size means that there is going to be a large uncertaint
y on any observations he makes.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\paragraph_spacing double
In 1980 the census bureau changed their policy to include a large number
 of black people that were previously excluded.
 During the same time period a large number of Black Haitian immigrants
 came to Miami, and the census bureau simply grouped them together with
 black Americans.
 Both these groups of people were low-income, and very few of them had high
 school degrees or above.
 This shift in the CPS data would have shown itself as a significant drop
 in the average wage of workers with no education after 1980.
 This would have been seen in Borjas’ data even if no individual's income
 actually went down specifically because he made the choice to exclude those
 with an education level of high school or greater.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\paragraph_spacing double
Another factor that skewed Borjas’ analysis was the specific exclusion of
 non-Cuban Hispanics from his data set.
 The average wage of low-skill non-Cuban Hispanic workers in Miami started
 to show a positive trend after 1980 (Clemens, 2017).
 His reasoning for excluding this group was that they may cause wage drops
 in other cities Miami is being compared to, but the primary focus of the
 study is in Miami itself so that would have little to no effect on local
 changes.
 This gives us another situation where, all else being equal, wages would
 have decreased in Borjas’ study after 1980 just by virtue of the set of
 data he chose to examine.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\paragraph_spacing double
The choices Borjas made in determining his data set led directly to a large
 uncertainty due to low sample size, and also a conclusion based on data
 that showed a clear bias.
 These are the reasons the two studies diverged, and why you should be cautious
 accepting Borjas’ conclusions.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Bibliography
\begin_inset CommandInset bibitem
LatexCommand bibitem
label "Clemens, 2017"
key "key-1"
literal "false"

\end_inset


\begin_inset CommandInset href
LatexCommand href
name "There's no evidence that immigrants hurt any American workers by Michael Clemens (2017)"
target "https://www.vox.com/the-big-idea/2017/6/23/15855342/immigrants-wages-trump-economics-mariel-boatlift-hispanic-cuban"
literal "false"

\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Bibliography
\begin_inset CommandInset bibitem
LatexCommand bibitem
label "Peri & Yasenov, 2017"
key "key-2"
literal "false"

\end_inset


\begin_inset CommandInset href
LatexCommand href
name "The Labor Market Effects of a Refugee Wave by Giovanni Peri and Vasil Yasenov (2017)"
target "http://giovanniperi.ucdavis.edu/uploads/5/6/8/2/56826033/mariel_jun2_app.pdf"
literal "false"

\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Bibliography
\begin_inset CommandInset bibitem
LatexCommand bibitem
label "Borjas, 2017"
key "key-3"
literal "false"

\end_inset


\begin_inset CommandInset href
LatexCommand href
name "The Wage Impact of hte Marielitos by George Borjas (2017)"
target "https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1177/0019793917692945"
literal "false"

\end_inset


\end_layout

\end_body
\end_document
